- Hey, Timo.
- Hello, Michael.
- Hey, it's great to be here with you.
I'm super excited to talk about Async Python.
- Yeah, same.
Good to be here.
- Yeah, it's great to have you here.
You know, we've spoken a little bit through GitHub.
I think it's odd, but also kind of awesome
how many connections are made
through places like that, right?
Like we've never met in person,
but we previously chatted about some Async things
on GitHub?
- Yeah, it's always nice to kind of
see the same people again,
which you met like online in a call or something.
- Yeah.
Yeah, that's why I really enjoy going to conferences
'cause you're like, "Oh yeah, you're the person
"I've been talking to for six months."
- Yeah, absolutely.
- Yeah, cool.
Well, I'm super excited to talk about
all the awesome async Python things that you've curated.
Before that though, let's just get into your background.
What's your story?
in the programming of Python?
- Yeah, so I started programming,
I think when I was around 10 years old,
at the time I was exploring at an offline computer
from my parents, which didn't have a lot of like things
on it, but there were a few applications.
And one of those were, I think it's called FrontPage,
like Microsoft FrontPage and Publisher.
- Yes, it was like Microsoft Word for creating websites.
It was insane.
- Exactly, yeah, exactly.
So I was like playing around with this and just,
you know, exploring whatever was there
because I didn't have any internet.
And yeah, that's how I got interested
in like how things are built in a computer.
And at some point I got internet,
I kind of browsed around to see
like how these websites really look like.
And yeah, that's how I got into PHP,
the HTML and did some website stuff.
And then after-
- Open a website in front page,
couldn't you like point it at a URL and say,
open this and it would pull down the HTML
like into the editor?
I think I remember-
- I don't even remember.
What a weird, what a weird piece of software that was.
Yeah.
I'm just thinking back of like the early web was a weird time.
I think I, I more use publisher than I use front page because it was more
complex for me at the time.
And I didn't really have any documentation or tutorials.
So I, yeah, it was more like fiddling around and getting something
to work and something to happen.
Cool.
So you found your way to PHP.
Yeah.
Then I went to PHP, did some very basic websites like guest
books and these kind of things with PHP, but nothing really
big. And then after mandatory school years here in
Switzerland, I started an apprenticeship at Roche.
It's a pharmaceutical company.
So if you if you've done any PCR tests lately, you probably
have done that on an instrument of them.
And there I was in a team where we did hardware simulation
testing for software, which is running on these instruments.
And all these, like the testing framework
around the simulation was in Python.
And that's basically how I started in Python.
Yes, it's mostly like testing code
and providing frameworks in Python for testing.
- Yeah.
- Yes.
Those may need.
- That's cool.
That's a neat way where you can connect your code
to physical things, you know, testing.
>> Yeah, it's super nice.
>> I have a white man stuff.
>> Yeah. The simulation at the time,
it also had some 3D visualization.
So you could see motors moving around and
kind of see pipettes colliding and these things,
which was pretty awesome for me at the time
because it was my first job basically.
Yeah, it was super cool.
We also built with Python like
a distributed testing framework or testing system,
kind of like you would have in Jenkins these days
or any other CI system.
- Yeah, they probably don't have
as easy integration to actual hardware.
Now when I pushed to this branch,
I wanted to fire up that robot.
Oh, okay.
- Yeah, exactly.
And also like a huge problem is like error case testing.
Like you can't just break a needle in an instrument
while you're running something
because either you get hurt
or it just costs you $1,000
just for breaking something for testing.
So you need some kind of stimulation to actually do that.
- Yeah, very fun.
How about now?
What are you up to now?
- Yeah, I recently started a new job at GitLab.
I'm a senior backend engineer there in the configure group.
And what we're doing is we provide Kubernetes integration
for GitLab, GitLab projects and groups,
these kinds of things,
and also are responsible for the infrastructure as code
features like the Terraform state backend
and the Terraform provider,
which also I've been maintaining for a year now
as just like an outside contributor.
And yeah, but this is mostly Go.
Maybe you know Ruby is a big player in GitLab.
So the entire GitLab repo
is mainly a Ruby on Rails application.
So no more Python there.
Yeah.
>> Yeah.
Give us the elevator pitch on GitLab.
You know, is it I should use GitLab instead of GitHub or something else?
What's the value proposition for GitLab?
>> Yeah, I think it's a good question.
What you see here also on the screen is that it's called the One DevOps platform,
so it provides much more feature, I think, than GitHub in terms of, like,
in terms of like from planning to production, then monitoring an application,
get like all these insights which you cannot really do on GitHub.
So you have all, you basically have features for all the DevOps lifecycle stages.
Here for example you see the Verify where you have a very powerful pipeline integration.
Yeah.
- Yeah, I think the open source world
is happening on GitHub,
but a lot of enterprises are using GitLab these days
for developing their applications.
- Yeah, okay, cool.
Yeah, it's definitely an important piece
of the puzzle out there.
And how long have you been at GitLab?
- Just one month.
Actually, today marks my one month being at GitLab.
So pretty recent.
- Wow, so you're probably,
Yeah, you're probably just starting to get comfortable with how stuff works and how you
deploy it.
Exactly.
It was a lot of onboarding, but I've been contributing before, so not everything was
new and I've been using GitLab as a user.
So yeah, it wasn't that tough, I would say.
Cool.
All right.
Well, let's go ahead and jump into your project.
Sure.
It's one of these awesome lists, and it's about one of my favorite aspects of Python
because it async.io, async.innovate, they let you write such neat software that really takes
advantage of latency and when other parts of the system are busy, you can just keep on going without
rethinking how your code works all that much. So I'm a super fan of async.innovate in Python
and all the languages that use it, I suppose, because I just like the idea. But, you know,
tell us about your project and maybe first start with like what the heck is an awesome list anyway?
Yeah, so an awesome list is just a curated list of projects or whatever the awesome list is about.
It could be recipes or whatever. And it's just trying to collect awesome pieces of that thing,
in this case, async.io, which are async.io packages or projects. And you basically showcase
them to the readers. And they could, you know, take inspiration for the next project stack,
or can just explore like what's out there and what people feel that is awesome.
And yeah, I mean, I'm not an expert in all of these by far. So I'm more like a librarian of
the of the list and rely on people contributing actually their awesome projects or ideas or
whatever. And yeah, it's... Yeah.
Yeah, neither of us, just as a disclaimer up front,
neither of us are maintainers of all these projects,
or we're not super experts.
It's more of a survey of all the cool things.
And I do think that's one of the really cool powers
of the Awesome Lists.
I remember the first time I found Awesome Python,
I was like, wow, look at all these things
I didn't even know existed, right?
It's not necessarily that you use the Awesome List
to make a decision about what you use,
but it's like a good starting point for research,
depending on whatever area.
Like you've broken your list into stuff about databases
and about networking and about web frameworks,
and as we'll see, and you go to that section,
you're interested in, you're like,
"Oh, here's my 10 research projects
"to figure out what I wanna do."
- Yeah, exactly.
I think it's also nice to just,
once in a while browse through it
and see like where the ecosystem is at
and like what new things have been popping up.
So yeah, it's interesting.
So another thing I think maybe is worth touching on, I get the sense, although I'm not 100%
sure because I'm asking you now, that these things that get put there, it's not an exhaustive
list.
It's more of things that the community thinks reaches some threshold for interestingness.
So under the PRs, I see you got a new one an hour ago.
to the PRs, you have a please vote before these are accepted
because like what it means to accept a PR
is really to add a line to a readme.
It's not like a super, oh boy,
how does this affect our overall performance?
Like there's not a lot of considerations in that regard,
but the question is sort of,
let's talk about whether it belongs on the list, right?
How do things make it on your list?
- It's a very good question.
And I've never been really strict about these rules
and maybe I should be, I don't know.
But I usually put this please vote label on pull requests
just to see if people are interested in this.
And usually I also check things like the stars,
when was the last contributions?
Like how many contributors are there?
Because if we put something here on the list
and then people start using it
and we burn out some maintainers of a library
which just wanted to do, you know, publish something.
- Yeah.
that would be a good idea, right?
- Right, and on the other end of the spectrum,
you've got, maybe there are people who publish something
just for the heck of it,
but there's one person they've touched it two years ago,
and it's not necessarily something you wanna recommend
if there's five stars and no one using it,
and is it really gonna be good enough?
Okay, cool.
So I'm guessing it's open for people to go and do more PRs
and suggest more things if they listen to the show
and they're like, but you forgot about this awesome thing.
- Yeah, yeah.
If people are listening and have something awesome,
please create a pull request.
Always great to have some additions.
- Yeah, cool.
All right, well, let's go through it.
So I think we'll just take it section by section
or topic by topic.
And I know you pulled out a couple of things
that are interesting to you.
I grabbed a couple as well, and we'll just touch on them.
kind of work on that awareness and cover the broad spectrum
of what's available.
So we'll take it, I guess, the top section
that you have here, probably the most important section,
I would say, is web frameworks, right?
Let me actually put this back real quick.
So yeah, so for the web frameworks,
there's some interesting ones.
First of all, it's kind of notable,
the ones that are not there yet.
Maybe, actually, maybe there's some PRs that should be.
making their way there.
The really traditional web frameworks
that people think about are not there.
We don't see Flask directly, although through Court
it's there, which is kind of its full async implementation.
Django is not listed.
Bottle, Pyramid, a bunch of these older ones.
But the really hot new ones are here.
We've got FastAPI and Sanic and some of the others
- I guess people are just probably more excited about those
and then, you know, they're kind of hyped and add those
and that's probably why they end up here
and not having like Pyramid or the other ones.
- Yeah, well, Pyramid doesn't have a async version,
but you know, it's interesting that Django does.
And I think maybe somebody should do a PR for Django
now that it actually properly supports
all the way to the database layer.
But you know, until recently it didn't.
And what's notable, I think,
about all of these frameworks that are here on the web one,
and pretty much for many others as well,
is not just they have a capability to do async,
but they were kind of born to be async, right?
- Yeah, yeah, you're right.
And I think also some of them, I mean,
they're not all on the same level, I would say.
Like we have Starlet,
which may be like a very lightweight framework
that others kind of build on top like FastAPI,
which, you know, Starlette may be more comparable to Quart
than Quart is to FastAPI, right?
So we have these kind of different layers
where people could build upon and yeah,
so it's some variety.
- Yeah, yeah, and you've got a couple of WebSocket style
ones in here as well.
They're maybe not full frameworks,
but they work in that regard.
- Yeah, so, you know, notable to me here, certainly,
I mean, FastAPI is definitely taking the world by storm.
It only came out a couple years ago
and it's already got 50,000 GitHub stars
and that's close to what Flask and Django have.
It's certainly a popular one.
Yeah, have you got any chance to play with FastAPI?
- I do, yeah, or I did.
At my last job, we built some applications
on top of FastAPI.
And we also, at Roche, we open sourced one,
which is kind of nice.
I always like the FastAPI experience overall.
Like, you know, the documentation is super nice.
I think Sebastian did a great job
in also taking the extra mile
to explain more general concepts in FastAPI,
like introduction into AsyncIO and these kinds of things,
which the others do not have, they don't need to,
but it's just that you can see that they really care
about the community and the users of FastAPI
to make it very easy to put something into production.
- It definitely stands out in that regard for sure.
So FastAPI is notable.
I also think another one worth giving a shout out to
is Starlet.
Now Starlette is not as popular, right?
Having 7,000 get up stars.
Not that this is like a popularity contest,
but it gives you a sense of like
how many people are using it, right?
And so Starlette is its own web framework,
but it is also something that can be used
for the building blocks of other web frameworks,
which I think is unusual for, you know,
Flask isn't like, well, take us apart and just use us.
Don't actually use Flask or, you know,
but FastAPI itself actually is built on Starlet.
So much of what people love about FastAPI,
they actually love it about Starlet.
It's just kind of like a pass-through.
- Yeah, I think for a lot of things,
FastAPI is just a pass-through to Starlet.
And that's what I meant before with,
that a lot of people are like comparing
or see these blog posts like FastAPI versus Flask
or Quark and these kinds of things.
But it's an unfair comparison
because they're like Starlette and Quark,
I think they're meant to be extended into something
like going from the micro framework
to your like, yeah, bad application afterwards.
And I think you will have either start using FastAPI
if you need all these features, then you know,
it depends on the use case, I guess.
- Right, right, right.
Very cool to learn about that one.
Also Sanic, I hadn't really been tracking Sanic
until recent, I had been,
and then kind of didn't pay too much attention,
but this is a pretty popular framework, 16,000 stars.
- Yeah, it's kind of got its own philosophy.
It's a little bit like Starlette actually, that style.
- Okay, I've never used it.
I've seen it around, but I never really looked into it.
So what is it that it has a different style?
What do you mean?
- Well, so many of the web frameworks,
that's a great question.
So many of the web frameworks these days are like,
we're a brand new web framework.
We look just like Flask, except, you know,
we're just like Flask, but we're API oriented.
and we come with auto documentation.
We're just like Flask,
but we do this other slightly different thing.
You know, they're all like,
you create an app and then you say app.get or app.route
on your, and you kind of build up out of a blueprint
or API router style of like separator, right?
This, there's so many of these new web frameworks
that are highly inspired by Flask,
but they don't carry over the same runtime.
they carry over kind of the shell API concepts, right?
And Sanic is not so much like that.
So if you go and check out Sanic,
say like a good getting started,
let's see if I can pull up an example.
I have a huge button that says get started.
Maybe I should click that.
So you look at this in order,
I'm not really seeing a great little example
to pull just yet.
But if you look at the way that it works
is you just create functions.
Oh, here's, they're using this app.gets.
So I saw some, I believe, that were,
you just say, here's a function, here's its URL,
go and call it, right?
Where it's a little more, assemble it back together.
But yeah, anyway, it's an interesting web framework as well.
A little bit different.
And it's, I think it's really nice
that there's all these people
attempting different perspectives
on solving the same problem.
- Yeah, I think it's cool.
And probably depending on the use case,
one suits you better than the other.
I mean, it's not the fact that it's always the best choice.
Maybe work with the other for your use case
because you want something very minimalistic
or something you can extend in your own ways.
- Yeah, and some of these like Sanic just added
this ability to have background workers that are managed.
So you don't have to go all the way to like a celery worker
type of infrastructure, just the web framework will manage it.
And I believe Starlette also has that.
- Yeah.
- I guess one more thing to give a shout out to
is the stuff from the ENCODE folks.
There's a lot of those appearing here.
So they've got Starlet, they've got HTTPX and uvicorn.
Right?
Once you get one of these frameworks,
you got to run it, right?
- Yeah.
And probably it's one of the most popular
for production, I think.
At least that's what we've been using.
We've been super happy.
I mean, it works great.
It's super fast if you use it with uv loop.
- Yup, uv loop.
UV loop will make an appearance a little bit later as well.
But yeah, I've been using uv record for production also.
Loving it.
Okay.
And I guess also one thing I'll put into the show notes here
is I can't remember which framework had this
that I pulled it up, it might've been Sanic or Starlet,
one of those two, but they created a filter
across the tech and power web framework benchmarks
that just highlight the Python ones, right?
'Cause there's how many, 290 frameworks in this.
And you're like, I don't really care
what this obscure rust, super lightweight thing does
because it's not a full web framework
and I will never use it and so on.
So it's kind of interesting to compare
just the like raw basic ones or whatever.
But if people are, it doesn't necessarily matter too much,
but if you kind of want to get a sense
of what performance looks like across all of these,
you know, here's, I'll put a link
to the Tekken Power Benchmarks.
I don't know, what do you think about these things?
Does this influence you to see,
oh, Sanic is above FastAPI or do you not?
- Yeah, I mean, it's nice to see those comparison
and kind of see how the theory of optimization
in these frameworks kind of translate to practice.
But in the real world, I would say that
it doesn't really matter too much
because it's probably your business logic
which is slowing you down.
And these kinds of things or latency
to your database or whatever, and not the framework itself.
So I would take those with a grain of salt.
- Yeah, it's kind of like asking,
well, if I have a tight loop and I increment a number,
how fast can I do that?
I was like, okay, well, sure.
C++ is super fast for that,
but that's not what real software does.
Real software interacts with all these things.
And like that difference you think is so huge
is like a little marginal bit over the real work.
- Yeah, and I would also say that most of the people
don't actually need that speed, right?
Because if you may need it,
you may also choose another language or, you know,
if this really is a thing for you,
then yeah, I don't know if this micro-optimization
between Sanic and FastAPI really brings you much benefit.
- I would certainly say pick the API that makes you happy.
The programming API and the framework that makes you happy
and just go with that.
Yeah, good advice.
All right, let's see.
Are we on to our next section?
We are, message queues.
- Yeah, I haven't been a big user of any of these.
I've been using the MQP one a while ago,
so I don't really know where it's at these days.
- Message queues are interesting.
They're a way to add crazy scalability
if you've got a lot of stuff that takes a while,
but you don't need the answer right away.
They're pretty interesting,
but I just haven't needed them much myself either.
I did not too long ago,
speak with Min, Reg, and Kelly about ZeroMQ in Python.
And apparently they're doing a lot of cool stuff
for powering Jupyter with ZeroMQ.
So pretty, it's way more interesting
than I initially kind of in my mind gave it credit for,
but yeah, it's a cool project.
- So they're hosting Jupyter or what do they do?
- They're using it for something
for like the client server communication, I thought,
but it's been, that's what I think I remember,
but it's been like quite a long while
since I talked to them about it.
But yeah, we've got the AMQP one.
That's the one you talked about, right?
- Yes, it's the one you would use
if you use RabbitMQ, for example.
These are using the AMQP protocol
and then that's where you can use this library in particular.
- Oh, yeah. - Right?
You have the Pi ZMQ, that's the zero MQ
one I was talking about.
And then, you know, some others,
one for like Apache Kafka, for example.
But again, anytime you're talking,
these are usually separate processes,
sometimes on separate machines,
you're doing network comms.
Like if you have the word, I'm talking over a network,
then async and await, I mean, asyncio,
like what does the IO stand for, right?
- Yeah, and I think point being also here is that
you have async I/O libraries
for pretty much all message queues out there these days.
I mean, every time I looked and looked for a library,
it was, something was out there and you could use.
- Cool.
All right, let's move on to the next one,
which is the database stuff.
So I think this is another area where you spend,
especially in the web apps,
you're spending a lot of time waiting.
So thinking about your asynchronous database driver
is super important, right?
- Yeah, absolutely.
And I think it's not too long ago
when there wasn't really good support
for asyncio and databases.
So it's great to see that a lot of projects
are now supporting it.
And yeah, also you mentioned Django,
which has it all the way to the end,
I'm not a Django user, so I don't really know,
but I also guess that's a huge deal.
- I think, yeah, I mean, that was the main blocker,
I believe, is the Django ORM didn't have an async interface.
And I think it was 4.1, again,
not doing a ton of Django myself either,
but I think Django 4.1, which just came out,
kind of completed the whole cycle and added that.
- Very cool.
- Yeah, so what database drivers stand out
on this list for you?
- Well, I think async-pg is a very popular one
if you use Postgres.
I've been using it and usually you don't really see much
about them actually, because you may use SQLAlchemy
on top of these drivers.
So I think as the end user, you may not have seen them,
but you may have used them.
- The only way you might see them is you put
the async connection string in the SQLAlchemy
and it complains that it doesn't have this package.
I guess I got to install that.
Here we go, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
- Yeah, yeah.
So certainly the async-pg one,
I think is pretty interesting.
This one is from the Edge TV folks, right?
From, is that Magic, I believe?
Yeah, Magic Stack, like Yuri and crew over there.
So the same people that do uv loop, right?
He did a lot of the original async I/O work
in Python itself, I believe.
- Yeah, I think there's also a nice, interesting
Talk Python to Me episode with Yuri, I think it was on.
- Yeah, I think I spoke to him in the,
about a year ago as well, and that was a great chat, yeah.
Let's see, what else stands out to me here?
So motor, if you're doing MongoDB,
then motor is often the building block,
much like async-pg would be the building block
for SQL alchemies async,
then motor is the building block
for a lot of the Python MongoDB async libraries.
- Yeah, I also noticed that for Redis.
Yeah, did the Redis one, which is--
- Which one is that?
The Redis Pi?
- Yeah, exactly.
So I noticed a week ago or something
that this I/O Redis was included
into the official Redis Pi library.
I don't know when that happened,
may have been a while ago,
but I still think it's nice to have another separate package,
but the same package you have the sync API for,
and you can use similar APIs so that you don't have to
rethink everything if you want to switch to async.
It just makes it easier to migrate if you want to.
Also move back for some reason.
>> Yeah. I agree.
Some of these have both APIs.
Like for example, SQLAlchemy,
You can create an async setup connection string engine
sequence, or you can do a synchronous one.
And depending on what you're doing,
you might-- like this utility doesn't want to be async,
so we're just going to go and use the sync API.
But your web app or API might want the async version.
Let's see, a couple more notables here.
The Piccolo one I think is pretty interesting,
because I really think the query syntax for this one
is quite expressive.
Have you played with Piccolo?
I have not, but I still admire its query style.
- I recently checked it out though.
And I also had the same impression
that the query syntax is super nice
because compared to others like Prisma,
I also looked at lately and while they have type safety
with like type six, it's that, you know,
here you actually have the Python symbols
or variables you can use,
which is I think a little bit nicer than having strings,
even though they can be auto completed.
- Yeah, yeah.
And you get, and when you do refactoring,
like it understands what's going on.
So just for people listening,
for example, to do a select statement,
I would say a weight because it's async,
Band would be the class.
You say band.select, then band.type.name,
and then .where band.popularity greater than 100.
A lot of these ORMs and ODMs have like janky syntax
to push operations into it.
So for example, in Mongo engine,
you would say popularity_gt equals 100.
So popularity greater than 100, but you're saying equals.
You don't want equals, you want the greater than symbol.
This is like exactly the same meaning in SQL
as it is in Python, which I just really like that.
- Yeah, and it's also super cool if you're entering
a code base and you see these kinds of things
because even if you don't know Piccolo,
you would understand what's going on,
which I think is a good aspect of a nice API.
- It is.
So Brandon, now the audience has a question, says,
So we can use asyncpg in place of psycopg two.
I don't, I haven't done enough with this, but what are your thoughts?
Do you have any ideas?
Um, I'm quickly checking.
I I'm not sure if the latter one really is a sink.
Yeah, I think the deal is the, the, the latter one, psycopg two is not a sink.
Yes.
And so that's what say SQLAlchemy would use if you had created a synchronous
but if you want to do the async version,
then you would have to use the asyncpg foundation
for it basically.
I think that's my understanding,
but I do more MongoDB than Postgres.
- I think so too, but I wouldn't really know
because I've always lately been using async only.
- Yeah, exactly.
- It's not the only thing you would have to change, right?
You would also have to adapt your code
and put the weights here and there
and make your code async.
You can't just replace the query string
and then expect it to work.
- Yeah.
All right.
So one other one here that I think is probably noteworthy
to put in the database drivers,
and I'd like to hear your thoughts on this as well,
is the AIO SQLite.
- Yeah.
- Right?
And it's on one hand interesting
because SQLite doesn't really do much concurrency.
So you're like, well, that's silly.
Like why would I ever want to use AIOs,
like the asyncio with it, if it doesn't really do that.
But if you're writing a web API or website
or something that uses SQLAlchemy,
and you wanna on dev use SQLite just for like a simple test
and you wanna use Postgres in production,
well, guess what?
Your async code will fail to run on SQLAlchemy
unless you have AIO SQLite as the foundation
like we just talked about.
So it kind of allows you to still test your code
and run it even though you wouldn't necessarily
directly use it?
- Yeah, I think we've always been using
AO SQLite for testing purposes.
It's super nice because you can use in-memory databases
and don't need to worry about the setup too much.
And it just works basically.
I need to be careful though.
- SQLite's really nice.
Yeah.
'Cause it's not exactly a match, right?
- Exactly.
So we had the case where it didn't,
It worked in testing and in CI and then broke in production
because we haven't been using or testing against Postgres.
- All right, let's move on to the networking section.
All right, so what stands out?
There's not that many of this one.
This is not overwhelming like the database thing, right?
- Yeah, I think probably a lot of people know is HTTPS,
which is a super nice requests like package
for making HTTP calls.
It has a similar API and the good thing
or what I really like is that you can use it
in sync and async and the API looks pretty much the same.
So if you wanna switch from sync to async,
I think it's a delight to use it.
Yeah.
- Yeah, you can just say httpx.get
just like you can with requests, which is great.
And then if you want the async version,
do they have an async example?
It's super easy to click.
I think you just create like an async client
and then call the same functions on it.
Yeah.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Yeah.
Here you go, let's see.
Exactly.
Much like requests where you create like a client,
you just say, or a client session, I guess it's called.
Say, create an async client, then you,
okay, await the client.get.
Yeah, it's always interesting.
it's to me how libraries decide to add on async and an,
I mean, rephrase that, a synchronous
and a non-synchronous version,
like they're both variants into the same library, right?
Do you see people doing that successfully?
Like, do you see any patterns that you really like
when they do that?
- I think I actually like how HTTPS is implemented
in that regards.
I didn't dig much in the code base,
but like you have the same like protocols for the API
so that you can reuse them easily
and kind of interchange that,
I think the transport layer in this case.
Yeah, it's super nice.
But for my own libraries, it always bothered me too,
that there is no really nice API to provide both
in like the same function.
Like you couldn't reuse the function name
an async version or the method name, right?
You need to have another class with it.
- Right.
- But I guess that's just how it is.
Well, I think if, you know,
I think a lot of these probably grow up,
they come into existence to be one or the other,
and then they're like, all right,
well, we kind of want to have both, so how do we add it?
And if, personally, if I was going to start
from the very beginning,
I would like to see what they're doing
just for the synchronous version of HTTPX,
where you just say httpx.get.
But instead of saying import HTTPX,
you'd have to say from like HTTPX synchronous,
import HTTPX or from HTTPX async, import HTTPX.
And then it's just exactly the same API,
but you have to await everything versus not await.
I don't know.
I think there's like,
if you said that we'll control it at the import level,
And then what you get is either all awaitable
or it's all blocking.
I don't know.
- Yeah, it's a nice pattern.
It would be a nice pattern.
- Yeah.
- By the way, could you await this get?
Not really.
Or is there like a, you always need a client
if you wanna have async support?
- I'm pretty sure for HTTPS, you have to create the client
and then you have to create an async client
then you can await it.
- Okay.
- I've also seen other APIs.
You have get, then you have like a get_async,
but I kind of don't like that,
since you could just do one import statement,
and fix it, so I don't know.
But it's really, as I'm going through all these examples
that you've curated, I'm thinking like,
okay, some of these have both APIs,
and how are they making that clear to people, right?
Yeah.
All right, what else is noteworthy on that list?
I think maybe we could just super quick touch on it.
You've got an async SSH library,
like literally that's the name.
- Yeah, I haven't used that one.
- And a ping, right?
I haven't either.
- I think it's nice to have like here at least
to have some, well, if you wanna do a ping,
like it may not be obvious what to use.
So I think it's a good one
or at least people consider it a good one.
So I think it's nice adding those to the list.
So there are a few like niche libraries on the list,
which wouldn't make a huge,
like they wouldn't get many votes probably if you do this
because--
- They're not broadly useful.
You're like, oh my goodness, I've been building a DNS system
and I'm so glad I found AIO DNS.
But actually some of the frameworks,
like I believe HTTPS uses that under the covers,
pretty sure.
Something I played with recently was like using AIO DNS
under the covers to make its work
a little more asynchronous.
- Yeah, it would make sense, yeah.
- Yeah, excellent.
All right, let's move on here.
Testing, I think, is what I meant to talk about.
All right, so yeah, yeah.
Tell us about the testing story.
- Yeah, so I mean, here of the ones we see on the screen,
there's IOMock, there's AsyncTest, pytest, AsyncIO,
A-Responses and AIIO-Responses.
and I've been only using pytest async I/O to be honest.
It basically gives you a decorator to mark
your async pytest or your tests as async,
so that they run in an event loop.
There's also now a mode you can set
in the configuration where you don't need that marker.
If you have a test, you would say async def
test_sum_asyncIocode, and then
your normal test code and you would decorate this function
with a pytest mark async IDA decorator.
But yeah, I think not necessary these days,
you could configure it to have it in auto mode
where it basically just detects always it's a coroutine,
I scheduled it on the event loop.
Yeah, it's super simple.
- That makes a lot of sense.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, and this is not about trying to say,
well, I've got a bunch of async test functions.
So let's try to run them all in parallel,
like X test or X dist or any of those types of things.
It's just, I have some function I wanna call
and test its result, it's async.
So I have to await it.
In order to await it, the test function itself
must be async and then how do I run it, right?
Now what?
- Yeah, I think the other way would be kind of cumbersome
to create an event loop every time
and then schedule your core routine in there
and pytest async I/O just does that for you.
- Sure, you could do it,
but it would make the code not look normal.
It'd be like all these weird things you have to do
to like async to sync FI.
And we'll see some frameworks that might even do something
in that regard for you, but.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I really, this is really nice.
It just seems like if you're testing code that is async,
clearly this is something like this is what you want.
Yeah, let's see.
Also mocking, I hadn't really thought about mocking
async methods, but I guess you need some--
- Yeah, I've done this, but I haven't used this IOMock.
So there is, I think even in unit test mock,
there's an async mock, like a class which you can use.
So I'm not really sure why you would need this.
- So, you know, this has changed six years ago.
I wonder if the asynchronous mocking capabilities
were not in the framework itself when this got created
and then probably like, you know what,
we should just be able to test our own stuff.
So let's fix that.
Yeah, I'm guessing.
Okay.
Yeah, pretty nice.
You mentioned uv loop before in one of the sections.
This is maybe the only section that has a single item in it,
but it's a big one.
UV loop, right?
- Yes.
- For alternate loops?
- Yeah, exactly.
So you could use, if you run async.io,
you can just use the one which is in like CPython,
and you can just use that.
But there is other implementation like this uv loop,
which is based on libuv,
which is another event loop in C.
And it's just this super fast
compared to the built-in implementation.
Yeah, I think it's great for production use cases.
- It's so nice because in order to use it,
a lot of times if it's just literally installed
in the environment, things will use it.
Like I believe UVA Corn will use it if it finds it
and some other things.
You don't even have to say, please use it.
It's just like, oh, it's available, let's go.
The, and if for some reason you need to explicitly use it,
like in your code, you just say uv loop,
you say asyncio.setEventLoopPolicy
and you pass over the UVA loop policy class
and now the rest of your program just uses that.
It's really nice.
- Yeah, I don't think you have any other like--
- Yeah, go ahead.
- Or other implementations actually.
- Yeah, I don't either, but it's really nice.
And it basically bundles up, as you said, libuv.
They've got some nice performance graphs.
It says uv loop makes asyncio two to four times faster.
And who wouldn't want that for free, right?
- Sorry?
- Who wouldn't want your asyncio code
to just go two to four times faster with no effort?
- Yeah, as you said, it's super easy to install and use.
So there's no really downside.
- Yeah, so Mario has a totally reasonable question
and the audience, why wouldn't you be able
to just be the standard AC guy implementation then?
What's the catch?
- Well, I don't know what the catch is,
but I could assume that it's easier to change
outside of the CPython development cycle.
And yeah, probably that's one of the reasons.
I don't know.
- That's a good idea.
So do you want Python itself to take on libvv as a C dependency?
And then third, when I played with uv loop originally, it's been a few years, it didn't
work at all on Windows.
Its implementation of libvv was a-- for whatever reason, it just wouldn't install on Windows.
And that, obviously, is a breaking change or a stopper.
So maybe even if it works on Windows,
maybe there's like some obscure place where Python runs,
but libvv won't, you know,
think of like some small device,
like a Raspberry Pi or whatever, I don't know.
- Yeah, and I think we're coming down to the discussion
we had before about the benchmarking again,
that maybe not everyone actually wants this speed
or needs this speed.
Maybe it's just for like very optimized production use cases
and you actually need this four times faster.
And for all the other use cases,
maybe it's your code that is slow anyway.
So you don't really care too much.
- Yeah, there was a discussion about a few years ago
about why is requests not just built into Python, right?
They're like, well, there's URL stuff in there,
but it's way less obvious how to use it
compared to just request.get, done.
And response.json, when you get your response back
and whatnot.
And they debated that at the Core Dev Summit.
And they decided if we put requests into CPython,
kind of like you were saying,
it'll actually slow the progress
and the evolution of requests itself.
And they wanted to keep this nice library,
its own thing that could go at its own pace.
- Yeah, it makes sense.
I think there, I also heard that the security there,
it's easier to patch the library in like on PyPI
and make people one update
and shipping a hotfix release or whatever of Python
to fix those security issues.
- Yeah, absolutely.
And Brandon just says,
I just learned that FastAPI starlet
use uv loop by default.
Yeah, that's one of the things I was thinking of.
If it's installed in the virtual environment
and has access to it, it'll just take it and go.
No need to make any changes there.
All right, awesome.
So that's just the one thing in the alternate loop section,
but quite neat indeed.
Ben, there's gotta be a miscellaneous, right?
There's gotta be a utils, there's gotta be a helpers.
There's gotta be something that's just like,
well, what the heck is this?
Tell us about the grab bag at the end here.
- Yeah, there's a few here, which I find very interesting.
The first one here is IO-Chan,
which adds a CSP style concurrency features.
So if you've done some Go programming,
you came across channels, I would say.
And this I/O chan brings these kind of patterns
into Async I/O.
So basically what you will have is you can create a channel
and then you can have multiple core teams
like a producer and a consumer listening
and writing to this channel.
And you can have it buffered or not.
And these kinds of things,
you can select on multiple channels
and react on incoming data, these kinds of things.
So it's just another way to communicate
between your coroutines than what you would probably do
with the built-in mechanisms.
- Sure.
And a lot of those patterns are incredibly hard
to get just right with the event signaling
and all those things.
And so if you can just hook it in, then it's good to go.
- Yeah, you could probably make this work
with queues and events and all these,
but it's nice to have the abstraction.
- Yeah, of course. - Right, exactly.
- GSP primitives.
- Yeah, it's sort of equivalent to saying,
well, you've got a HTTP server built into Python itself,
like why do you need Flask?
And it's like, no, no, no, no.
No, we don't wanna do this.
Other notable ones here,
like one that stood out to me is AIO cache,
which is pretty straightforward.
It's like just a cache, right?
Add, get, set, even has a cool increment and so on.
but it's asyncio and it talks to Redis memcache,
Redis memcache, message pack,
a bunch of different capabilities it has, right?
- Yeah, it looks super cool.
I haven't used it, but yeah,
it's nice that you can just switch out the backends
and use something else.
Also the API looks very straightforward
with like just .set, .get.
- Exactly.
It's pretty straightforward to, you know,
a wait, a cache.get or a wait, a cache.set.
Yeah, it seems like a real nice, real nice API.
- And also the decorators will look interesting
so that you can cache our coroutines probably.
- Yeah, exactly.
That's just, I didn't really catch that before you.
Right, so people are probably familiar with the func tools.
- LRU cache.
- LTS cache.
the LRU cache.
Yes, I'm like, oh, there's a, it's not a T.
LRU cache, thank you.
But this is that idea, but instead of saying,
well, where you cache that is in memory,
as you just say, cache equals Redis,
which is like, wait a minute.
Okay, that's cool.
That's really cool.
- Yeah, it's cool.
Just make sure the latency is lower
than actually your execution time.
But yeah, it looks very nice.
- That's a really good point.
Like if you call this a bunch of times
the Redis is far away, like it actually might just be slower.
But the CPU will be nice and low, so you'll be fine.
- Yes. - Now, this is a cool project.
Another one that I really like, I think,
adds some important capabilities is AIO files.
Tell us about that one.
Yeah, it basically provides you file API support
like you have with normal like open and these kind of functions
and do it async with async.io.
But I'm not sure if I read it here,
but I think on some platforms like Linux,
it's hard to actually implement this correctly
with like ePoll and stuff.
I don't know if you know more about this,
but I heard that it's not really a big benefit actually
to run it async.
- Yeah, I don't know either.
What it claims here is it doesn't try,
I don't think it tries to do fancy work
with truly hooking into asynchronous stuff in the file.
So it just says, it's just gonna run it
on a background thread, basically.
- Oh yeah.
- So it probably creates like a worker thread
and whenever you ask to read it,
just in the back, it goes open.
And then when you say await read,
it just on that thread, it maybe sets an event
and then does a read or something,
I don't know, a little bit of like juggling
background threads, but yeah.
So in a sense, it may make it actually tiny bit slower,
but if you're doing an API and the API has got to read
or write a big file, that could be a problem.
The other one is, you know, we'll see this
in a couple of things we're discussing in this section.
File, sometimes it might be slash user slash whatever,
but it could be, you know, backslash, backslash,
network server, backslash, network drive, right?
It could be very, very slow where all of a sudden, you know, unlocking that access is
a huge deal.
Yeah.
Does this actually support this?
This library?
So could you...
Talking to your files?
Oh, if you have it mounted as a drive, you mean.
Okay.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
Like what the thing you're talking to might actually be far away.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
does say handling local disk files,
but I bet if you mapped it in your OS, it wouldn't know.
>> Yeah, probably it will work.
What I also like here,
there's also an I/O path.
>> Yes. That one actually looks maybe even cooler.
>> I think a lot of people are using Pathlib these days,
and I/O path basically gives you an async path type,
which you can just wrap around your strings or path objects,
and you get the same methods,
but you can evade them basically.
You can have your path.open, path.exists,
you need to use an evade, and this is for you.
I don't know here how it's implemented,
if it's also using background threads or if it doesn't match it.
>> It actually hook into the true I/O completion ports
and all that business.
- Yeah, so this is really cool.
So you could create, we all know about path from Pathlib,
it's super neat.
And you can ask it questions like, does it exist?
Or create this directory, or is it a directory?
Or you can actually say read bytes, write bytes, read text.
There's a lot of things that you would do
with a context manager that become
just one liners with Pathlib.
And this async path lets you make all those asynchronous,
like await path that exists, await write bytes, and so on.
- And the cool thing is there really,
I think try to be a drop-in replacement for Pathlib
in the asyncio world.
So if you've been having a code base
or have been using Pathlib in an async code base,
it's super easy to just switch
to an async version of Pathlib.
- Oh, excellent.
It says the implementation here, let's see.
Does it tell us?
It inherits from PurePath, which is cool.
So you could use it as an argument to some of the pieces
that will take path objects directly.
It takes advantage of libAIO for asyncIO on Linux,
which is probably where you care most about performance,
because that's where your server is, right?
>> Yeah.
>> So we're talking about libAIO, but yeah.
That's probably some sort of native type thing going on there.
Like Linux native asynchronous IO access library.
Yeah, that's okay.
So maybe this is not just a little bit better.
Yeah, maybe it's not just a little bit better
than AO files because, well, you can work with path objects,
but it has like an OS level implementation as well.
That's pretty great.
All right, I'm using it.
Looks good.
Yeah.
That looks like those are all the ones that jumped out at me.
Those two that you called out there, the cache and the files,
and the path history, I guess.
Anything else worth mentioning real quick?
No, I don't think so.
I mean, the misc one is just a miscellaneous package in the miscellaneous packages,
I would say.
So, yeah, I'm going to sell it.
I just think maybe it's in there.
It's like the meta miscellaneous,
or miscellaneous squared or something like that.
That's right, there's a bunch of random helper things
in there, that's cool.
Then you have some stuff,
let me just go to quickly flip through it.
Like there's some stuff on writing,
like tutorials and articles,
and then some video talks about AsyncIO in there, right?
- Yes, yeah, I think there are good ones.
I think a lot of them are actually from David Beasley.
I'm not sure.
- Yeah, David Beasley has done some cool stuff
with kind of recreating Async.io live in the early days.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
- And then Yuri, who we spoke about.
- Yeah, if you really wanna know like how you can think
about like a mental model of Async.io,
I think these are very good talks.
I should better understand.
- Absolutely.
Cool, I don't know about this guy though.
All right, then the last thing you closed it out with
is alternative implementations to AsyncIO,
not just like a tool you can use within AsyncIO,
but there's Curio and Trio
are like probably the big two there, right?
- Yeah, I think Curio,
I think it's from David Beasley as well,
but I don't think it's maintained really.
But I think it's been a nice experiment
and at the time I looked at it,
it was kind of minimal in the implementation.
So you could kind of digest
and see how something would be done like AsyncIO.
- Mm-hmm, okay, yeah.
- There's Trio, which I think is still out there.
And that's also why Any.io exists probably,
because it kind of, you can use Any.io as a front end
for Trio or Async.io and add some more high level features
on top of Async.io.
- Yeah, I recently had Alex from Any.io,
creator of Any.io on there.
And just real quick shout out for some of the things
I thought was cool over there,
is it could run on top of Async.io
or trio, which is cool.
It also has some really interesting aspects
for like converting threads
into converting regular functions
into a weightable things by running them on other threads.
And it can either do that on a thread
or it can even do that on a sub process.
So you can like go and say,
a weight run process and then you get its value back, right?
or you could do that with multi-processing,
or even create a asynchronous for loop
over the output stream, like standard out of some process.
- Yeah, I could have used this a few times in the past.
- Yes, I know.
This is really, really neat to be able to do that.
The other thing is the synchronization primitives
like events and semaphores.
He says, I haven't tried it out really,
but they're supposed to be a little bit less likely
to get deadlocks or race conditions
because they're not re-entrant basically.
- Okay, nice.
- Yeah, so there's a bunch of cool little helper
type things in the IO there.
Well, that's pretty much it I think for the list.
That was a lot, but a lot of good stuff.
A lot of awesome stuff, wouldn't you say?
- Yeah, and I'm sure there's more awesome stuff out there
like the Escolite one we've covered.
You added one five minutes before the talk started.
- 'Cause I was going through, I was like,
oh yeah, this one, I was looking at motor,
I'm like, oh, well, the stuff built on motor,
there's some good ones there, let's throw those in
and people can vote for them if they want.
I'm sure that people listening,
if they maintain one of these libraries,
if they're big fans and use one a lot
that's not on the list, go make a PR, right?
- Absolutely, yeah.
I also plan to add some more automation
so that we can, for example, check for dead links.
It would also be nice to kind of catch outdated libraries
like the 20, like the IO mock that we've seen before.
- Yes, exactly.
Like, you know, if it hasn't been touched in six years,
it probably isn't needed anymore, right?
- Exactly.
Yeah.
- Cool.
Yeah, awesome.
I mean, this is a great resource
and I sort of shouted out the popularity
of some of these projects to give us sense.
like your list has got 3.7 thousand stars.
Like that's pretty awesome.
That's a lot of people who got value from it.
- It is.
And I can only recommend to look at these lists,
you know, whatever list it is,
there are gems in there
and it's kind of nice to discover them.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Really quick out in the audience,
Numatos logic says starlet,
I'm sorry, starlight is an async framework
built on top of Starlit in Pydantic,
which is a good candidate.
I didn't actually give a shout out to it,
but I thought, oh, no, it's not on there.
Okay, well, PRs are accepted and reviewed.
Starlette, there you go.
Cool, all right.
Well, Timo, this is really excellent,
excellent project here,
and a ton of people are getting value from it,
so thanks for putting it together.
- Yeah, thanks to all the people
who suggested the awesome stuff.
So I'm, as I said, merely the maintainer of the list.
So keep them coming and we'll make it even better.
- Excellent.
All right, before we get out of here, final two questions.
I feel like you could just randomly pick one from your list
but the notable PyPI project,
you wanna give a shout out to?
- I think it's not even on there,
but it will be Tenacity.
- Oh yeah, Tenacity is good.
- Yeah, it's a library for retrying stuff
And I even, I think it has async.
I'm pretty sure it has async support.
But it makes it super nice if you have like network calls.
- Async retries, there you go.
- Yeah, so it's even the same decorator,
which is cool from an API perspective.
I don't even think you have to import something else,
like something differently.
- So, right.
- Because you can actually inspect the function,
which is being decorated and you can decide what to run.
So yeah, pretty cool.
I suggest you use it if you want to retry something
or have unstable endpoints or whatever.
Yeah, I love the features to be proud.
- This is a great library.
If you're consuming someone else's API
and that thing is flaky, what are you supposed to do?
You've got to call it potentially,
but you can't count it always working.
I've run into that problem on a lot of my projects as well.
And I've either done something like Tenacity
where you just say,
retry it with some kind of exponential back off,
or I'll go through and cache it in my database
and say, I'm gonna try it.
If it fails, I'm gonna go get it from the database
and go, it might be a little bit stale,
but at least this way,
if it's up to kind of stable, like a currency lookup,
like, okay, an hour ago, the dollar to Swiss francs,
the lookup was this, and it might not be perfect,
but it's better than just going 500 server error.
- Yeah, and I don't know how many like while loops
I've written in my life to kind of check a timeout
and retry and sleep and these kinds of things.
And it's hard to get this right because, you know,
you wanna catch termination of the program
and cancel these things.
So it's nice to have a library for all these.
- Yeah, cool.
And the fact that they support async
is like perfectly blends in.
Yeah, and then--
- I could use it as well.
- Yeah, yeah, actually it would belong there now.
All right, and then the other question is,
if you can write some Python code,
what editor are you using these days?
- These days VS Code, it's important though
that it has been key bindings.
I've been a user for quite some time,
so I certainly need that.
Yeah, but VS Code is my editor to go these days.
- Awesome.
All right, final call to action.
people are interested in your awesome list.
What do you tell them?
- Please contribute your awesome ideas, make it PR.
Also, if you have ideas around automation,
please send them our way, create a pull request or--
- Yeah, that's a good idea.
As a maintainer, that's a very welcome thing, right?
Find things you don't have to maintain, I'm sure.
- Absolutely, yeah.
- Awesome.
All right, well, thanks so much for being here.
Thanks everyone for listening.
Yep, bye.
>> Bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]